README.md, before:

# 2bit.el

## Introduction

`2bit.el` is a package for Emacs that provides a collection of functions,
macros and interactive commands that can be used to extract data from [2bit
format files](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format7). These are
files that can hold DNA sequences in a compressed format. You'll see samples
of this if you look at the [human genome
data](http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/bigZips/), for example.

## Emacs Lisp support

The package is built such that it provides functions and macros for working
with 2bit files, and then goes on to build interactive commands on top of
this code. The elisp-level support code includes:

### 2bit-open

`2bit-open` should be called to "open" a 2bit file for further use:

```elisp
(2bit-open FILE &optional MASKING)
```

`FILE` is the path to the 2bit file you want to open. `MASKING` is an
optional parameter to say if mask blocks should be taken into account when
reading bases from the file. (*it's worth noting that in my testing, mask
block handling tends to make the reading of data a lot slower*)

### 2bit-sequence-count

`2bit-sequence-count` can be used to quickly get the count of how many
sequences are held in the 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-count file)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

### 2bit-sequence-names

`2bit-sequence-names` can be used to quickly get a list of the names of all
the sequences held in a 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-names file)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

### 2bit-sequence

`2bit-sequence` can be used to quickly get a named sequence from a 2bit
file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence file sequence)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

`SEQUENCE` is the name of the sequence to get.

### 2bit-sequence-dna-size

`2bit-sequence-dna-size` returns the size of the DNA contained in the given
sequence.

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-dna-size sequence)
```

`SEQUENCE` must be a value returned from `2bit-sequence`.

### 2bit-bases

`2bit-bases` can be used to get a string of bases from a sequence in a 2bit
file:

```elisp
(2bit-bases sequence start end)
```

`SEQUENCE` is a value returned from a call to `2bit-sequence`. `START` and
`END` describe the sub-sequence to grab. Note that the convention of
zero-based, inclusive of `START` and exclusive of `END` is used.

### 2bit-with-file

`2bit-with-file` is a simple macro provides as a convenience wrapper when
working with a 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-with-file (handle file)
  ...body...)
```

`HANDLE` is the name to give to the "handle" of the 2bit file, and `FILE` is
the file to open. For example:

```elisp
;; Get a list of the sizes of each of the numbered chromosomes in the Human
;; Genome.
(2bit-with-file (hg "hg38.2bit")
  (cl-loop for chr from 1 to 22
           collect (2bit-sequence-dna-size (2bit-sequence hg (format "chr%d" chr)))))
```

## Emacs commands

The following interactive commands are available:

### 2bit-insert-bases

`2bit-insert-bases` simply inserts the requested sequence at the current
`point` in the current buffer.

### 2bit-insert-fasta

`2bit-insert-fasta` simply inserts the requested sequence at the current
`point` in the current buffer, formatted in [FASTA
format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTA_format).

[//]: # (README.md ends here)

Commit message:

:books: Add a link to a YouTube recording

README.md, after:

# 2bit.el

## Introduction

`2bit.el` is a package for Emacs that provides a collection of functions,
macros and interactive commands that can be used to extract data from [2bit
format files](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format7). These are
files that can hold DNA sequences in a compressed format. You'll see samples
of this if you look at the [human genome
data](http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/bigZips/), for example.

## Emacs Lisp support

The package is built such that it provides functions and macros for working
with 2bit files, and then goes on to build interactive commands on top of
this code. The elisp-level support code includes:

### 2bit-open

`2bit-open` should be called to "open" a 2bit file for further use:

```elisp
(2bit-open FILE &optional MASKING)
```

`FILE` is the path to the 2bit file you want to open. `MASKING` is an
optional parameter to say if mask blocks should be taken into account when
reading bases from the file. (*it's worth noting that in my testing, mask
block handling tends to make the reading of data a lot slower*)

### 2bit-sequence-count

`2bit-sequence-count` can be used to quickly get the count of how many
sequences are held in the 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-count file)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

### 2bit-sequence-names

`2bit-sequence-names` can be used to quickly get a list of the names of all
the sequences held in a 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-names file)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

### 2bit-sequence

`2bit-sequence` can be used to quickly get a named sequence from a 2bit
file:

```elisp
(2bit-sequence file sequence)
```

`FILE` can either be the path to a 2bit file, or a value returned from
`2bit-open`.

`SEQUENCE` is the name of the sequence to get.

### 2bit-sequence-dna-size

`2bit-sequence-dna-size` returns the size of the DNA contained in the given
sequence.

```elisp
(2bit-sequence-dna-size sequence)
```

`SEQUENCE` must be a value returned from `2bit-sequence`.

### 2bit-bases

`2bit-bases` can be used to get a string of bases from a sequence in a 2bit
file:

```elisp
(2bit-bases sequence start end)
```

`SEQUENCE` is a value returned from a call to `2bit-sequence`. `START` and
`END` describe the sub-sequence to grab. Note that the convention of
zero-based, inclusive of `START` and exclusive of `END` is used.

### 2bit-with-file

`2bit-with-file` is a simple macro provides as a convenience wrapper when
working with a 2bit file:

```elisp
(2bit-with-file (handle file)
  ...body...)
```

`HANDLE` is the name to give to the "handle" of the 2bit file, and `FILE` is
the file to open. For example:

```elisp
;; Get a list of the sizes of each of the numbered chromosomes in the Human
;; Genome.
(2bit-with-file (hg "hg38.2bit")
  (cl-loop for chr from 1 to 22
           collect (2bit-sequence-dna-size (2bit-sequence hg (format "chr%d" chr)))))
```

## Emacs commands

The following interactive commands are available:

### 2bit-insert-bases

`2bit-insert-bases` simply inserts the requested sequence at the current
`point` in the current buffer.

### 2bit-insert-fasta

`2bit-insert-fasta` simply inserts the requested sequence at the current
`point` in the current buffer, formatted in [FASTA
format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTA_format).

## Example

Here's a simple recording of a sample of using `2bit-insert-fasta` to create
a FASTA file from a 2bit file:

[![](https://img.youtube.com/vi/OimlNumAKWo/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OimlNumAKWo)

[//]: # (README.md ends here)
